---
layout: post
title:  "Lisp: Day 0"
date:   2119-02-08 08:00:00 +0200
author: Amando Abreu
categories: lisp programming
comments: true
newsletter: true
language: en
image: /assets/images/posts/lisp.png
---

The first time I heard the term "linked list" was in the beginning of 2017 when reading
[JavaScript Allongé the 6th](https://leanpub.com/javascriptallongesix/read)

Turns out it's from an *obscure* language called Lisp, which literally stands for List Processor. I immeditately assumed it was created by Oskar Schindler, but it turns out it was a guy called John McCarthy.

2 years later I decided to investigate more about Lisp, and found [this site](http://wordsandbuttons.online/learn_you_a_lisp_in_0_minutes.html) that claims most people already know some Lisp.

*Wait... I already know some Lisp?*

Turns out that if you look at this for about 1 minute it all makes sense. Might be even faster if your algorithm tekkers are fresh and you can extrapolate what qs means in the context of algorithms.

{% highlight lisp %}
(define (qs xs)
  (if (empty? xs)
      (list )
      (let (
        (middle (first xs))
        (others (rest xs)))
        (let (
          (left (filter (lambda (x) (<= x middle)) others))
          (right (filter (lambda (x) (> x middle)) others)))
            (append (qs left) (cons middle (qs right)))))))
            
(qs (list 4 5 1 2 3))
{% endhighlight %}

So, what next?

> Consider this. If practicing with JavaScript, or Python, or C#, or whatever your primary language is made you unknowingly learn some Lisp, then shouldn’t it work the other way around as well?

Perhaps I will attempt to write a [GIMP Plugin](https://docs.gimp.org/en/gimp-using-script-fu-tutorial.html) if an idea pops up, either before or after reading [Land of Lisp](http://landoflisp.com/) which is about 4 books away from being read, but I find that having a reason to do something(such as implementing an idea) is a powerful way to learn. Without an idea, or a goal that is bigger than just learning for the sake of learning, I find it hard to stay interested.

> A robotics expert once said: "I'll never be a match for the desperate trial-and-error attempts of an amateur" - Kazuya Kanemaru, CEO, On-Art Inc. "If Dinosaurs Moved"




