---
title: Is it *done*?
layout: post
newsletter: true
comments: true
author: Amando Abreu
date: 2021-12-31 10:01:00
---
Customer: Is my engine done yet?

Mechanic: Yes

C: Great, then I'm gonna drive home

M: The engine is done, but it's still not back in the car

C: But you said it was done

M: Yeah, but not "done done"

Raise your hand if you've had similar interaction when working in tech. (but usually with a feedback loop of days or weeks, and maybe some awkward situations with customers or investors). 

What often follows is an argument of what "done" means. And sometimes it's fruitful. But other times it isn't. 

## What's the problem?

From a manager's perspective:

1) You ask if someone is done

2) They say yes

3) But the feature they are working on isn't actually on a server yet, and you can't interact with it

After reading this you'll know:

1) How to ask better questions

2) Why simply defining done isn't enough

3) Why you don't have to ever ask if something is done


## If you're asking questions

Maybe it doesn't matter what *done* means if you're asking the right questions. Let's see:

What just happened in the mechanic example above was *shifting goal posts* due to bad logic. The engine is indeed *done*, but that doesn't imply that the car is ready to drive. The person asking the question, due to not knowing enough about the matter at hand, made the assumption that "if the engine is ready then I can drive the car", which is incorrect. 

The engine is a part in a complex system and it being done doesn't necessarily mean it's working together with the rest. Much like software.

If you don't understand something, like managers often don't understand software. Don't try to ask questions that don't directly answer what you *actually want to know*.

The customer shouldn't have asked whether the engine was done if he wanted to know whether he could drive the car home. The question to avoid all that miscommunication would have been "can I drive the car home yet?".

If you're the one asking questions. *Ask what you want to know.* 

Instead of asking questions that give you information you don't really know what to do with. It's one of those cases of "a little knowledge is a dangerous thing". 

Don't be afraid to sound "dumb" by asking overly simple questions if they are *exactly* what you want to know.

If you want to know whether something is ready to demo to a customer. Ask:

> Is this ready to demo to a customer?

Don't ask if it's "done". 

## If you're answering questions

Don't take any questions at face value. If the answer to a question is something the person asking is unqualified to understand, ask them to rephrase. Ask them to ask exactly what they want to know from a business point-of-view.

In the mechanic example above, a more experienced mechanic might have answered "the engine is fixed but we still have to put it back into the car", but then they give away more information for the customer to make even *more* incorrect conclusions, or worse, ask "oh how long will that take?" which would of course be answered with "depends".

The mechanic might have answered with a very conservative "no" because the engine might be fixed now, but other issues might be found when putting it back into the car.(which would affect how long it takes to put it back into the car).

The thing with hearing "no" very often when asking if something is done, is that then the complaint will be that things take too long to get done. 

So, maybe. If you're having meetings to discuss the definition of "done" you're just not asking the right questions and expect a definition of a word to magically solve the issue that may lie in how you define work to be done.

## Defining *done* and creating a sane context for it

"Is it done?" is rarely asked without context. But the context matters. It matters who you ask it to, and what you mean by it. If you ask "Is the user story US-69420 done?", and by "done" you mean its status, then, it's[ a waste of someone's attention](https://amandoabreu.medium.com/you-dont-understand-your-software-engineers-53442ca0805a). You can just GO to US-69420 in your task management system and check if that's the status! *gasp*

However, this is the thing that needs defining. Done as a status for a task. And you never need to ask this, because you can go look at the task.

Case 1) I'm a developer and I'm done developing a feature. You ask me if I'm done. Well, *my* part is done, so I might say "yes". But QA isn't done, and it isn't in production yet. So, I'm "done", but the status of the task isn't "done".

"Done" might mean things are in some sort of staging/preview environment 

Assuming that I, as a developer, change the status of things I've worked on into "ready for QA" (for example), and once QA is done and things get automagically deployed to production with no issues, someone changes the status to "done". You can just go check the status of the task.

When you ask if something is done, it's too vague. If you're asking whether a very well defined *user story* is *done*, this is the *done* you should be defining, and the user story should have more information. 

Example user story for the mechanic example:

US: 

TL;DR; You don't *ever* have to ask if something is done because it's written in your task management system. When you ask if someone is "done", you're asking a subjective question. Go look at the status of the task. And define what "done" means in the context of a status.